---
layout: post
title:  "How I learned Chinese in Six Months"
excerpt: Being in China was only part of the equation
featured_img: /assets/images/noodle-bowl.jpg
series: language adventures
---


I arrived in China knowing only the characters 1 through 10.  I could also introduce myself, and tell someone I could speak a little bit of Chinese (but really, that sentence *was* the little bit). 

I ordered my first few meals with body language and by pointing at menus. 

I very quickly got fed up with not being able to communicate with people. 

My only other experience learning a new language was Spanish in school. Learning a language on the go, while in a place where you are surrouded by it everyday is a totally different story. On the one hand, you have constant exposure, making it potentially easy to pick up new words/expressions on a regular basis. But at the same time, there's just so much that you can't understand, surrounding you constantly, that it can be overwhelming. 

I remember looking at a sign at the top of a building, thinking, there's no way anyone can ever learn this language. At that time, characters to me just looked like amorphous, unintellible square shaped scribbles. There was no logic to it. 

But at the end of six months, I was able to  have basic conversations, verbally and via texting, and could travel alone with no problem. It was still a long way to fluency, but it was a good start, and a start worth sharing for anyone who might be interesting in taking up Chinese.

Here's how I managed to go from total beginner to having a conversational grasp of the language in a matter of a few months. I'm not going to explain my process of learning the language, because I definitely didn't do it in the most efficient way. I'm going to explain t in the way I wish it was explained to me. 

In this piece, I'm going start out with some of conceptual aspects of the language, because it's important to have a foundation of the language before you jump right into learning words and sentences. Learning Chinese for someone who speaks a latin or germanic language is very difficult because it requires a different mindset. You can study all the words you want, but unless you learn and use them with the right mindset, you won't be able to grasp the language. 

<hr/>
...

<div>Note: While reading this blog post, I highly encourage you to have Google translate or Pleco (mobile) open, so you can look up the pronunciations of the characters in the examples. Also, start with learning Pinyin (the phonetic system for representing Chinese syllables in letters). That'll save you an incredible amount of time with pronunciation later on. Take a few hours and just cram it. </div>


Why is learning Chinese so hard

Chinese is hard because it's a different paradigm, a completely different mindset than the one you are used to if you grew up only speaking a European language. It's not a matter of learning verb conjugations and vocabulary (once you learn Spanish, for example, you can learn French or Italian incredibly quickly just by substituting the verb conjugations and vocabulary - all the patterns and structures are the same). Chinese, I'd argue, is one of the hardest languages in the world. Even native Chinese speakers take 10 years to become fluent in the language, and it only became common for the average Chinese person to read Chinese within the last 100 years. It's no surprise it's so complicated, as it's one of the oldest living languages on the planet. Over all those years, it's evolved and grown to be nuanced and layered in ways that English is not. 

But don't let the complexity turn you off. It becomes much easier once you dive right into it. As long as you go into int *knowing* it will be very different, you won't be surprised. Consider it an opportunity to break down your conceptions of the world and reform them in a new way. No, of course, you won't forget your native language, but you become privy to the knowledge that the way we think about the world is largely influenced by the words we use and the concepts they convey. And so by learning a new language, especially one so different, you'll be abnle to open you eyes to a new way of looking at the world. It may sounds scary, but trust me, it's a lot of fun, and it'll be worth it when you can communicate with people from a different part of the world and understand them at a deeper level than that of just a tourist or a spectator. I'd also suspect that it may make people more tolerant of one another when their can speak each others' language. 

hereas English has a visual and sound component to each letter, Chinese characters are not phonetic. In English, you could read a word you've never seen before by sounding out the letters. In Chinese, there are no letters. If you see a character you've never seen before, you cannot pronounce it. What that means is, every Chinese character has to be _memorized_ in its appearance and corresponding meaning. Characters themselved represents concepts. A word can be composed of one of two characters, but may mean something (subtly) different alone vs. when it is paired with another character. 

Let's look at an example:

爱 = love (can be used for romantic love as well as saying you love to do something, etc)

好 = good (used in much the same way as the English good. Fun fact, Chinese doesn't have a word for 'bad'. In most cases, bad is just 'not good')

爱好 = hobby

Here we can see that two characters, 'love' and 'good', are combined to form the word 'hobby'. That's not completely intuitive. That's the first point we need to understand: Chinese is very much a contextual language. Characters mean different things depending on ther context, i.e. depending on the other characters around them. There are, of course, characters which have meanings on their own, but in most cases, their meaning is basd on traditional usage, as opposed to an inherent definition.

E.g. 福 = luck, fortune, prosperity

In Chinese culture, this character can be seen in many place as a symbol for good fortune, and is placed on doors and entrances, especially during holidays. The meaning of the word comes from its usage in certain tradition contexts, and not so much based on its fundamental "definition". There are also other character which mean 'luck' in Chinese, but you cannot paste them onto your door (I mean you can but people will either be really confused or laugh at you).

The the main point here is, don't think of characters as fixed words with fixed meanings. Better yet, don't study characters individually at all. Study *expressions*. One of the mistakes I made learning the language was treating it like Spanish or another language related to English, and studied individual words. I figured, if know the grammar, and know tons of characters, I can just fit those characters into set grammar structures and express what I want. In Chinese, it doesn't work like this. 

That brings me to the next important conceptual point: Chinese doesn't have grammar. Okay, that's an exaggeration, but for all intents and purposes, for a beginner *it doesn't*. Chinese has the SVO (subject, object, verb) grammar pattern, like English, but that's where the similarity ends. Chinese does *not* have, tenses, plurals, verb inflections or conjugations. Grammar is also, for the most part *contextual*. For example, one of the most common grammar characters (called particles), is 了. This character basically implies that something changed. It's ofted taught as the equivalent of 'ed' for past tense in English, but it's not and anyone who tells you that is cheating you. Better to *know* that it's complicated in the beginning and not completely understand it, than assume it's simple and then try to fix your understanding later on. 

E.g.

我昨天吃了蛋糕 = I ate cake yesterday.
我开心了 = I'm happy (I became happy/I'm happy now)

In both of these sentences, the 了 is signifying that something was changed. In the first one, it's the action of eating. You are not still eating and you are not saying a general statement that you ar a person who eats cake, so the 了 signifies that the action of eating cake is over.

In the second example, the thing that changed is your emotional state. I + happy + 了 (change of state). I wasn't happy before, now I am. This sentence would be used if you were sad or disappointed about something and somebody tried to cheer you up. If you just wanted to say generally how you're feeling (no change), you'd say 我很开心.



I'm going to make this a multiple part series

Next: 

For me, there are three major components to language learning. Theres 1) studying words and expressions, 2) 

Pleco, handwriting input, translating subway stations.
Google translate to convert pinyin that I heard into characters.

As with all things in life, learning languages becomes much easier when you have people around you who you can ask questions to or who will guide you along.
...
not only that, but I thought if I could learn the language, I'd be able to open myself up to an entire


 I was already familiar with pinyin - . But then 

The company I was interning for hired a tutor to provide weekly hourly lessons. On top of that, I downloaded the app Pleco. Google translate also proved incredible useful on many occasions (ironically, I never used it for on the spot translations, only to translate words, like a dictionary). 

 I was convinced learning reading and writing would either impossible or take a decade. 

...

One of my biggest hobbies for a while was learning languages. 
...

A new language opens you up to a whole new world

...
A big part of my motivation to travel, was that I wanted to be able to communicate with people better. Or course that meant simply expressing myself better in my own language. but it also meant 