---
layout: post
title:  "What is a Singapore and Where?"
excerpt: 
featured_img: /assets/images/shibuya-night.jpeg
---


The idea was to go from Bangkok to Singapore by land, and from Singapore, fly to Germany where I'd be studying for a semester. I managed to get my internship company to sponsor the ticket (it makes sense in a very convoluted way, the internship offer included a round trip ticket home - a way to atrract foreign students perhaps - but since I wasn't going home, nor was I going to my next destination from Beijing, they obliged to buy me a ticket from wherever I'd be at the end of my mid-semester vacation, to wherever I was going to end up in my next "phase", whatever you want to take that to mean - to me, it was all just travel (in hindsight I probably could have found a more efficient way to just travel than pay university tuition, but in those days I wasn't thinking financially)). I had a deadline, and a starting point. What I'd do in between was to be played by ear. After my first backpacking trip, I'd proven to myself that the benefits to planning in advance were not greater than the drawbacks - freedom to improvise and deviate from the plan with no repercussions - and so for nearly all my trips since then, I'd made a concerted effort to plan nothing, all leading up to a peak of spontaneity (after several years of honing the craft) wherein I'd show up in a country not knowing where I'd sleep that very night... and be totally fine with it. 

...

So what I did in between was done in between, and here I'm going to talk about the endpoint: Singapore. 

I took an overnight train from Kuala Lumpur to the train station at the very north part of Singapore. They left the lights on overnight, something I should have been prepared for;they do the same in the 2nd and 3rd class cars of the slow trains in China). But the difference here was that this traincar was almost entirely free of passengers, and there were no sleeper cars. I was in a sit with retina-scalding fluoescent lamps above me, in silence, for nine hours, overnight. I tried to catch some z's by tying a jacket around my head (a good tip by the way, on any flight or voyage where you don't have an eve-cover (but better yet, just get yourself an eye-cover)).

I made it through the night only scalding my retinas a couple times when trying to adjust my head-jacket, and arrived in Singapore. This would be first of many times I'd cross through immigration between Malaysia and Singapore - a fact I couldn't have known then. 

The first thing you notice is that there's a huge difference in style between the Malaysian and Singapore sides. Let's just say, Malaysia has a slighty more "relaxed" vibe. 

But wait. What *is* Singapore anyway. At that time, knew very little. I was told it was a highly developed Asian city by someone in Beijing, and I'd also met some traveling Singaporeans there, all of which built up a very mysterious image in my head about the island-country. And after my three day trip, I can't say that that mystery was very much solved. What I knew upon arriving was that: 

1. Singaporeans could speak fluent English and Chinese.
Seeing as I, someone who's mother tongue is English, spent the past six months convincing myself that Mandarin is an incredibly hard language to learn *because* it's so different from English - and then seeing a Singaporean person going around speaking both like its no big deal, left an impression, to say the least. To say the most... well, it sort of shattered my worldview when it came to languages and worldviews. 

You see, I had spent those entire six months trying to remold my worldview to be able to contain the outlook on the world which comes from the connotations and implications of the Chinese language, which I'd considered to be very different from the worldview I'd previously had which was built solely on the way the English language represented it. So for someone to natively have those two worldviews coexisting and able to be seamlessly accessed instantaneously and according to the cultural scenario as needed was something which I couldn't wrap my head around. *Singaporeans were special*. And that's only one side of it. While in China, I'd also become familiar with the ways in which Chinese people found English to be difficult, both in pronunciation, and concept-structure, and so I convinced myself that the languages were simply too different for anyone to really be fluent in both to a native level. The connotations between the two are them were incompatible, I believed. And as a corollary to that believe, I was fully convinced that anyone who *did* manage to obtain a level of comprehension of both language to a level that was close to fluency, would have an *extreme* advantage over anyone who did not - simply because of an implied ability to wade effortlessly through a vast sea of cultural compatibility, with all the social and professional benefits that could provide. 

To this day, I'm not sure I fully understand the way having two of perhaps the most disparate languages in the world be absorbed into your mind at a young and developing age affects worldview, if at all. 




